## The Section Detailing All Creature Types

### Terrestrials

Terrestrials are mundane creatures that ultimately extract their energy from sunlight. They do not have innate magical powers as a creature category, though some individuals can exhibit the ability to control magic. For example, horses are Terrestrials as they eat photosynthesizing plants and are not magical, though it is possible to find one that could exhibit magical characteristics as an individual. Terrestrials are usually extremely abundant low level creatures.

**Natural Abilities**  
Round Table was created by terrestrials, and so takes many of their common attributes for granted such as seeing light and using chemical energy to effect physical movement.

**Sub-Types**  
Beasts are the largest subtype of terrestrials and include mammals, reptiles, amphibians and birds. Beasts include extinct animals such as dinosaurs.  
**Plants** are terrestrial growths. They usually don’t move and use photosynthesis to grow. Some plants can move or be magically altered to become mobile or carnivorous, but are still considered plants and therefore terrestrials. Plants can be poisonous, or in rare cases venomous. Plants are unique in that they can define a terrain type such as forests or grassland, and can also constitute rough terrain, cover and other features.  
**Fish** are another somewhat unusual subtype of terrestrials because they breathe water instead of air and swim without the ability to move on land. Terrestrial fish are the fresh or salt water varieties that live within the illuminated surface area of bodies of water.  
Humanoid terrestrials are the most common humanoid sub-type and include **Humans**.

### Constructs

Constructs are creatures that are comprised of mechanical and arcane materials and energy with individual components that do not lend life to the whole. A pile of bones or body parts is understood as “dead,” and those parts are not useful for any purpose but their former use as parts of a creature. Assembling them does not make them function, nor does it make the assembly “alive.” Somehow, the assembly of certain non-living materials and energies in certain ways does create utility or even something some might argue is “life.” These assemblies are Constructs, and their nature, alive or not, is the source of controversy and confusion for many. Constructs need not be humanoid thinking androids, they can be simple arcane or even mundane machines. The boundary and definition of construct is a key theme in any game including significant use of constructs. Don’t shy away from it. Let your party wrestle with it and decide whether a trap or a wagon is “construct” enough to be considered a creature. At what point does a construct stop being a construct? Is the severed arm of a construct a second construct? The finger? A single length of its pipe? These are questions for you to answer in your setting.

**Natural Abilities**  
Constructs are usually fundamentally different from other creatures. By default, constructs do not need to eat or breathe. They do need energy, which they may acquire from rest or from some other source such as a battery or spell components, so you should define how constructs in your setting regain expended energy. Similarly, constructs very rarely heal themselves, and instead must be repaired. Some can repair themselves, others rely on outside sources for repairs.

**Sub-types**  
**Clockworks** are mechanical constructs that are usually mundane in nature, though sometimes powered arcanely. They are usually powered by a crank and use a series of gears to deliver that power to achieve their extremely limited number of possible tasks.  
**Remnants** are constructs made of the flesh and bones left behind after death. It is important to remember that they are not undead. The undead are disembodied spirits. Their bodies, if they are made to wander after death, are constructs.  
Humanoid constructs are usually called **Androids**. They are extremely complex and may even have the capacity to be possessed by human minds, however the thing that makes them humanoids is that even without hosting another humanoid, they are capable of complex thought and socializing. A human shaped construct is not necessarily humanoid.

### Cthonites

Cthonites are underground, underwater and deep space creatures, those with strange bodies living in alien ecosystems of the Deep. Cthonites can be identified by the fact that they have many limbs and eyes compared to similar terrestrials, bioluminesce, and that there are no herbivores among them. There are plenty of omnivores, but there are not enough plants in the Deep to sustain a creature through all its life cycles, so even relatively harmless creatures such as caterpillars might have a dark side. They are predatory creatures of darkness that live primarily in the Deep, but can be found infesting many dark places in the surface realms.

**Natural Abilities**  
In addition to climbing and squeezing as natural movement, Cthonites can perceive their world in complete darkness, whether they do this through touch, bioluminescence, or some other sense is up to you. You can also choose to allow them to bioluminesce to communicate or to help see or be recognized in total darkness. The bioluminescence is rarely bright enough to be seen even in dim light, or to shed dim light on an area.

**Sub-types**  
**Mushrooms, lichens, mold** and other fungi are cthonite growths. They rarely move, though they are often poisonous, and they are just as often useful spell components.  
**Insects and spiders** are tiny cthonite creatures with exoskeletons and many legs. They are often venemous, and the varieties originating in the Deep can grow to be several dozens of kilograms. They are extremely strong for their size and make formidable opponents, especially when they are parts of colonies that can number in the tens of thousands of members.  
**Deep Fish** are aquatic cthonites that include cephalopods. They usually have very strange body shapes, many limbs, bioluminescence and sometimes also venom. In rare cases such as octopuses, they can squeeze and climb just like their terrestrial cousins.  
**Humanoid Cthonites** may include any sort of subterranean creature that has gained intelligence and society, including ant-people or underground elves.

### Divines

Divines are creatures who originate in a world outside of our own, often in many worlds outside of our own. This force imposes itself, usually upon humanoids, in a cosmic competition with the primordial spirits, often for the undead souls of humanoids. The exact nature of this conflict, how it is played out, and the ultimate source and goal will be different for every setting, but the divines represent a significant force in the universe that can be used to achieve great good. Whether or not this is borne out in practice is up to you, as there is absolutely no expectation that the divines are aligned with goodness, though the gods often use cults to define goodness around their own moralities.

**Natural Abilities**  
Divines have the natural ability to perform magic as their primary skill. Their bodies may also be impervious to mortal weapons. They do not need to eat or breathe, but they do need to spend a significant amount of time resting to recover lost energy, and they must do so on an altar. Divines can sometimes procreate through the creation of children, and sometimes have the power to grant apotheosis; to transform another creature type into a divine.

**Sub-types**  
**Demi-gods** are monstrosities that include divines. They can be any type of divine attached to any other creature, for example a fish that has eaten and become fused with an idol, or a regular everyday human whose mother is human and whose father is a god, or whose great-great-great grandmother is a god who gave birth to her ancestor, three magic fish and a spear, all of which are demi-gods. Demi-gods, like most monstrosities, exhibit traits of both sides of their nature but usually more detrimentally than beneficially. Demi-gods often search for their non-divine side to be granted apotheosis so they can become fully divine.  
**Demons** and their humanoid versions, devils, could play an important role in your game. Their exact nature in relation to the rest of the divines is up to you, but they are characterized as those in direct and necessary opposition to the divines, creating a clearly defined “good” and “evil.” Some might say they were created by the divines just to create such a distinction.  
**Idols** are divines that have taken the form of an inanimate object. They can communicate telepathically and can cast spells without moving or making a sound. They can sometimes assume an ethereal form to interact with the world around them, though they frequently enchant others to do their bidding instead. Idols, like magic objects, cannot be destroyed by mundane means.  
Humanoid divines, usually called **Gods**, socialize somewhat with eachother, but seem to socialize excessively with weaker humanoids, who they are much more likely to collect into a cultish faction beneath them. Pantheons of associated divines usually collect themselves exclusively to protect themselves from being killed by eachother or other powerful creatures so they can be left to toy with the lesser folk in relative peace.

### Draconids

Draconids are arcanavores. They are creatures that acquire their energy from magic. Collecting massive heaps of magic items, spell components, focuses, even altars to sleep on only forms part of their quest for power. They are also unusually capable of destroying magic items using dragonfire, an explosive arcane reaction that tears magic from its tethers in the physical world. Dragonfire is not necessarily a breath weapon, many draconids keep it in their bellies to melt magic items they eat. Once rendered into smoke or dust in this way, the magic from a destroyed magic item can be consumed by draconids like food. Their scaly skin protects them from physical damage, and the magic residues in it protect them from magic as well. Draconids sometimes also exhibit feathers, and often have wings, whether or not they use them to fly, and can have anywhere from zero to dozens of legs.

**Natural Abilities**  
Draconids exist more in the arcane world than their closely related kin; the terrestrials and cthonites. They are arcanavores, meaning they eat spell components rather than food and are the only creatures that can naturally destroy magic items, by using their dragon fire to consume them. They usually hibernate, which is to say they take long rests that can last days or even decades. Draconid skin usually confers damage reduction to physical or magical attacks or both and draconids usually sense magic directly as their primary sense.

**Sub-types**  
**Dragoneaters** are an audacious, subcategory of draconids that actually hunt, kill and eat other draconids. Usually preying on the young or those hibernating, dragoneaters include behirs and wyverns, both lacking breath weapons or strong magic, but both packing dragoneater poison, a powerful venom that can paralyze and kill draconids of any size. After gorging themselves, dragoneaters only need to hibernate for a matter of days before they can be on the hunt again, and they can go over a year between meals. They are also shameless scavengers, and will descend upon a dragon carcass in terrifying squabbling flocks.  
**Drakes** are classical European style dragons with two or four legs, scales, no feathers, and wings. They breathe fire and/or dragonfire that looks like fire. They usually live in cycles that include long hibernation periods before they emerge to devastate the landscape until they have destroyed the entire ecosytem and consumed all the magic, then they hibernate some more. This apocalyptic cycle is revered by humanoids who live in drake-infested lands, but it also serves to protect the drakes, as they end up killing all the young dragoneaters and the humanoids in the area so they are not ambushed when they go back to sleep. Drakes can usually only benefit from a long rest that lasts longer than 100 years.  
**Wyrms** are draconids with any number of legs, with or without wings, but who have very long, serpentine bodies. Wyrms do not go through the same apocalyptic cycles as drakes, but can become equally powerful over their extremely long lifetimes. They hibernate, and usually focus on creating a hoard of magic items and altars powerful enough to give them restful sleep instead of consuming all the magic they can find in a reign of terror. As they hiberate, they periodically exhale dragonfire and slowly burn their entire hoard to magic smoke, which they then breathe over the course of their hibernation. Magic smoke leaking out of a mountain is a telltale symptom of a great wyrm living nearby.  
Humanoid draconids are called **Dragons**. They may be drakes or wyrms with the ability to talk and socialize, or they may even be capable of shapeshifting into human-like forms. They still consume magic items, but may either install themselves at the top of cults to themselves to force other humanoids to bring them what they need, or socialize with other dragons to form powerful alliances or cultures among themselves.

### Elementals

Elementals are creatures that are composed primarily of a single element and who are animated by arcane energies. They are not created by humanoids, but are naturally occurring and self-proliferating, and their bodies are made of their element, not of inert pieces attached together. Elementals usually come from elemental planes, and can be composed of pure individual elements such as titanium, mixed or abstract elements such as stone, or even energies such as light or abstract concepts like love.

**Natural Abilities**  
Elementals naturally have either an ethereal or physical form. Sometimes they can shapeshift only into a familiar physical or ethereal form that they also use frequently. Usually both of these forms are elements. For example, an ice mephit may be able to shapeshift into water vapor, but its natural form is ice. Elementals are not naturally immune or resistant to their element or energy type. Humans are largely made of bones, but if you shove a bone into a human, they usually die. Similarly, an elemental made of fire would die if you shoved a bunch of fire into it. Elementals are naturally proficient with magic though, so they often have transmutative and other magical abilities that make it hard to kill them with their chosen element.

**Sub-types**  
There are many **elemental growths**. In places far from the terrestrial realm, elemental growths such as gemstone crystals and ore veins make up the primary food source for many creatures and sometimes constitute considerable dangers due to poison or self-replication on or inside the bodies of nearby hosts.  
**Mephits** are small elemental creatures that can easily be enchanted or otherwise coerced to work for humanoids. Much like pets, they are intelligent enough to obey simple commands, but not enough to be affected by politics. They are loyal to a master who has raised them and can trained and bred.  
Humanoid elementals are called **Jinn**. They live in the elemental planes in much the same way other humanoids inhabit their own planes, though they are more likely to cross over into other realms because of their magical nature, and because of that nature they are seen as powerful magical beings.

### Fey

Fey are magical creatures from either a liminal realm parallel to your primary material plane, or a parallel plane of existence all together. Fey are usually magical reflections or refractions of material realities, so they resemble terrestrials in many ways, but they are magical in nature. A jackolope, for example, resembles a hare, but it has antlers, and more importantly it can hop into ethereal space to escape capture. Crossings into the fey realms are liminal or reflective places such as pools of still water, mirrors in the dark, mirage oases, or the twilight of a thick canopied forest. You decide whether the feywild represents isolated ethereal regions of your prime material worlds, or is a single contiguous realm of its own. The fey and the feywild also have a strange relationship with time. The feywild may not exist at all times, its chronology may run in fits and starts, fey realms may be frozen in time, and its denizens are often unaging, or its visitors age extremely rapidly.

**Natural Abilities**  
Fey can pass through the ethereal boundaries of their homelands without issue. You can decide if this extends to the entire feywild, or only a specific realm, time or gate. Fey are universally magic and do not need to use spell focuses. Fey usually have innate spells that they can cast, and most fey creature rely on these spells instead of physical abilities, so a fey deer may turn invisible instead of running, and a fey coyote may enchant its prey instead of ambushing it.

**Sub-types**  
**Fell Beasts** are shadow-fey. They usually inhabit shadowy realms of the feywild, sometimes close to or bordering the realms of the undead. They harbor immense malice and hatred and are probably the closest things to truly evil creatures by nature. You may decide that the shadow realms constitute a separate realm from the feywild, or a realm within it, and the civilizations of your world may consider fell beasts to be evil fey or not fey at all, or an exact reflection of the good fey.  
Humanoid fey are **Elves**. They are usually considered aloof and could be a race of lone individuals that merely reflect human nature such as nymphs, or they could be a colonial empire rising out of the fey mists to rule the material plane benevolently or maliciously. Their natural magical abilities and ethereal nature usually instill awe and fear in other races

### Primordials

Primordials are the spirits of the material world that existed long before the arrival of the divines or the development of humanoids. Whether they predate the formation of the universe, created it themselves, or were created along with it, their time scale is beyond the ken of mere mortals. They often exist as paradigmatic spirit representations of other creatures. Their innate magical power, immense knowledge and wisdom, and meticulous approach to interacting with the world make them a source of awe and wonder, even in their most minute or banal forms.

**Natural Abilities**  
Primordials are naturally attached to their creature type and their locale. It is unheard of for a primordial to move from one place to another, and much more likely that if an environment becomes unsuitable for them they will transform into a monstrous and tyrannical form of themselves to turn the environment back. All primordials are primarily recon-based creatures, often with considerable magical power as well, and they usually resemble a chosen terrestrial in most physical abilities, though they are very frequently shape shifters.

**Sub-types**  
**Paragons** are the original, perfect archetypes of a species. There is usually only one paragon, though it sometimes has both a male and female body or can transform between the two. Paragons maximize all physical abilities of the species and often have additional magical qualities as well, even if they are the paragon of a species that is not naturally magical. Paragons are usually 5 levels higher than their offspring species at its peak and can be paragons of any species except constructs, divines or undead. It is said that the paragon of the Drakes, for example, is the dreaded Tiamat who slumbers beneath the universe and will rise one day to consume it all. A paragon that is defeated will usually emerge in a slightly new evolution meant to overcome whatever defeated the last one. Meanwhile, the species will wither and die, and a new one reflecting the new primordial will become dominant. Paragons can also be buried or otherwise restrained, causing them to go dormant and their species to go extinct until they are reawakened. The domestication of wild animals is done through the defeat or befriending of their paragon.  
**Land Spirits** are the embodiments of terrain features such as rivers, islands or glaciers. They can usually transform into the terrain in question at will and sometimes come into conflict with humanoids who would alter the land. They must be appeased or defeated, or else the land will refuse to change and the spirit may become wrathful. Similarly, these spirits can unexpectedly go dormant, or even shift their location slightly, causing massive upheaval for the creatures who rely on them. A land spirit that is defeated will usually be reborn in its new form as a protector of the new status-quo.  
**Humanoid primordials** are very uncommon. Primordials do not interact with factions on a daily basis, and do not typically act fast enough to keep up with politics. They usually take an entire day to take any action, and may slumber for a year or more at a time. 

### Undead

It’s important to keep in mind that the designation of undead in Round Table is meant to indicate the disembodied spirits of the formerly living, and not their re-animated bodies. Re-animated bodies are considered constructs. With that out of the way, undead can be understood as primarily ethereal creatures whose unlife is limited to their ability to acquire life force directly from the living. In this way undead are not evil, but their nature precludes them from interacting positively with living things. Anything living could be undead, but the undead tend to be rapidly anihilated by the chaotic process of dying. If they do somehow pull through unscathed, the undead cannot rest without taking their energy from the living and they are constant slaves to entropy in a much more acute way than the living are.

**Natural Abilities**  
Undead are ethereal in nature. With enough energy, they can sometimes summon a physical form. Undead can often possess creatures. Undead lose one energy every day that they persist. Once they are out of energy, they take wounds instead. Minor undead usually face this annihilation with no hope but to find a necromancer capable of giving them energy, however more powerful undead can extract energy from the living themselves.

**Sub-types**  
**Ashjar al-Jalad** are undead growths such as deathbed mosses, banshee mushrooms, waqwaq and zaqum trees or kelpies. They are growths that derive their energy from devouring the souls of the dead, and often use that energy to bind those souls, attracting more to die around them.  
**Vengeful Spirits** have a bone to pick. They have a singular goal which can provide them with a long rest, such as killing the children of a certain family, killing those who killed them, calling people to drown in the bog they drowned in, etc. After this goal is completed, they can rest and then rise at their full power once more to do it again. They may seem like humanoids because of their memories and complex mannerisms, but they are the hate that remains alive in the heart of a dead person. They cannot be reasoned with, and ignore all faction interactions. They are beasts hungry for their singular goal and nothing else.  
**Corporeal undead** have not been entirely disembodied. They use an ethereal or astral form to affect the outside world, but they are trapped in their body. If their body is destroyed, including through decomposition, they are annihilated. Corporeal undead who choose this fate usually mummify or otherwise preserve their bodies and keep them safely stored away. Corporeal undead looking for release will try to bring creatures to their body to destroy it. Unlike other undead, corporeal undead do not lose energy every day, though they cannot rest.  
Humanoid undead, or **Ghosts**, are fairly common, since it is most often humanoids who have devised a way to persist after their corporeal death. They retain all the memories of their life and usually still see the world from the paradigm of their living selves, so they tend to take forms and do things in ways that seem almost foolishly human. You may find a ghost walking, for example, even though its feet are incapable of touching the ground.

### Creature Sub-types

**Growths**  
Growths are mindless creatures that naturally spring up under certain circumstances and proliferate usually with only extremely small, nearly imperceptible movements. Growths cannot be enchanted, and they usually lack a lot of the senses of their type. For example, plants may not be able to see, smell, feel, and have no sense of balance or direction, etc. If a magic user is able to communicate with them, the information received could be extremely limited because the growth may not have taken in much information.

**Humanoids**  
Humanoids are creatures who can socialize. This means they are capable of faction interactions. Non-humanoids can neither defend nor attack using faction actions, and can only be attacked with them if the attack does not involve communicating with the victim. Even creatures capable of understanding words or commands such as dogs cannot be convinced with rhetoric, so a faction attack is limited to commanding the dog to do something simple but harmful, or getting another faction member to harm the dog. Similarly, screaming at a creature may be a faction attack to intimidate or frighten it, but you cannot use a faction ability such as persuasion on a creature such as a wolf. The designation of “humanoid” in no way directs other natural abilities such as speech or bipedalism. If you cannot communicate with another humanoid because of language barriers, you similarly cannot make faction interactions with them. Humanoids are considered to be humanoids and also whatever creature type they are naturally. There are no humanoids that are not another creature type. The humanoid creature type can be used to target any humanoids regardless of their companion creature type.

**Minions**  
Minions are simplified versions of creatures that don’t have the full list of skills and abilities that their more complex counterparts might. You should use minions to populate the general population of your world, such as deer. Minions are only proficient in one skill, and they are always one level below the lowest level of that tier. A wolf in a tier II forest then would most likely be level 6, with a \+6 in encounters, though one or two wolves in a pack will have martial skills instead. The Alpha wolf is probably not a minion, but a complex level 7 or 8 creature. Minions also have one ability related to their skill, which is usually what they are summoned or relied on for.

**Monstrosities**  
Monstrosities are combinations of creatures. Sometimes the combination is from within the same sub-type, such as a griffin which is a bird and lion, both beasts. Sometimes the combination stretches between sub-types such as a mermaid, both a beast and a fish (and also a humanoid), and sometimes it can be between two or more creature types such as a chimera, which is many parts terrestrial and one part draconid.   
Monstrosities can be created through magic intentionally or otherwise, or proliferate naturally. Monstrosities cannot be targeted as a creature type with spells or other abilities, but they are susceptible as members of all of the creature types to which they belong. For example, you cannot target a chimera by confining an attack to “monstrosities” but you can target it as either a terrestrial or a draconid successfully.  
Until the nature of a monstrosity is revealed, targeting the creature by type will be debuffed.  
Monstrosities generally balance their natural abilities between their various creature types, but usually fall prey to a stacking up of weaknesses rather than benefit from a stacking up of strengths. Thus it is not guaranteed that a winged monstrosity can fly, but it is likely that a monstrous terrestiral will lack magical abilities. Monstrosities can be individual humanoids, and monstrous cultures can exist such as snake-people, satyrs, centaurs etc.

**Shapeshifters**  
Shapeshifters are creatures whose natural form allows them to shapeshift into other forms. They have a single natural form, which they often must transform into between transformations, rest in, and revert to when incapacitated, amputated, or dead. Such transformation, though a natural ability, usually takes considerable energy. They have clear tells in all their forms that identify them as shapeshifters, and the shapeshifter category and their natural creature type can be used to target them with spells and abilities, but an assumed creature type cannot. For example, if a shapeshifting dragon appears as a deer, hunting it as a terrestrial will fail because it is a shapeshifter and a dragon, not a terrestrial.  
Shapeshifters can only transform into forms that are of a lower level than their natural form.  
They gain no benefit from transforming back and forth, such as healing or restoring energy. Shapeshifters can only transform into non-shapeshifter creatures that they have seen, or in very rare cases, non-shapeshifter objects they have seen.

**Swarms**  
Swarms are groups of creatures that behave communally. They communicate with one another in an extremely organized and fast way, without individuality. This allows each member of a swarm to act as an appendage to the swarm itself, but they cannot make individual judgements. A swarm is a single creature with multiple manifestations or bodies, such as a school of fish. The swarm behaves fundamentally differently than the individual and will have a different stat block than the individual. A member of a swarm who is not in current communication with the swarm is considered and individual. For this reason, environmental and magical attacks that impact swarm communication can dissolve a swarm without impacting individuals.  
