## The Section Detailing Different Terrain Types

### Common Environments

These are places that are friendly to human habitation, and so places where humans tend to frequent. You will find them as the core environments of your settings, especially in the early levels. Because they are easy to tame and live in, exploring and crossing them is trivial, low-tier business that many people do.

**Forest** environments are characterized by the complete domination of trees in temperate climates. These trees create a microclimate within a forest, changing the very weather, and are the primary concern of just about every other creature in the forest. The forest floor offers new clues for tracking prey, but may conceal common clues such as footprints. Waterways are often somewhat subject to the forest, being pushed around by fallen trees, and food sources including both plants and animals must live within the trees’ domain. An amateur might think a campfire can go unnoticed in a forest, not realizing that from below you cannot see the smoke signal, but from a few kilometres away it is clear as day. All these hazards must be carefully navagated by those who wish to become masters of the forest.  
A character trained in the forest terrain passes through the terrain of a forest floor as natural movement. They are also naturally capable of climbing trees, poles and other similar surfaces.

**Urban** environments are characterized by the alterations that humanoids have made to the natural setting. Whether they are human cities, kobold warrens or even dense farmland, creatures in an urban environment can hardly escape humanoid architecture. It takes a special mix of skills to make your way in an urban environment. Unlike natural worlds there is most often a great abundance of everything a humaniod might need to prosper, but this abundance is guarded behind norms, laws, social constructs and factions. An excellent urban ranger can find the commonalities between disparate peoples to earn or make their living in any urban centre, and even track people on the trackless cobblestones.  
A character trained in urban terrain can pass through crowds, debris and unusual terrain such as rooftops that would normally constitute reckless movment as their natural movement. They can also climb walls and buildings, and maneuver small gaps, drops, and squeezes such as windows and other barriers caused by urban development.

Whether it is the vast sahel, the steppe or the great prairie, enormous **Grasslands** can stretch for thousands of kilometers and constitute oceans or continents in their own right. It takes a skilled person to find sufficient food in this harsh environment, and often requires hunting large game over many miles. Moving unnoticed in steeply cut creek beds or badlands, and tracking those that do the same also requires a keen eye for life on the grasslands.  
Those trained in grasslands can move great distances with ease. Your natural strategic speed is 10km, the same as a horse. You can also ride one type of mount as natural movement.

Whether they are cold northern bogs or sweltering mangrove forests, Mediterranean reed deltas, or the bayou, **Swamps** represent areas where the ground and fresh water are mixed at the surface. They contain treacherous quicksands and mires and dangerous predators lurking in their shifting landscapes. Staying dry can be a life-or-death struggle as water swells from the skies above and the rising and twisting rivers below, and no assurance can be made that crossing once offers safe passage back. Those trained to move through swamps can swim and move naturally through shallow water, mud, and slippery surfaces.

Along the **Coast**, the land points toward the sea, and the sea points to the land as well. There is a place there, where the streams flow and the waves crash. The coastal environment is both of these places, land and water. The water is whatever is over 1km across, be it the ocean, a sea, a large lake, or even a very wide river. That water is the coast, and so too is the land around it. The interface is famously bountiful. And this bounty draws dangers. Huge sea storms crash onto land. Creatures grown massive from their terrestrial domains come to water. And many creatures live in this liminal place, caught in between.  
Those trained in coastal areas are naturally capable of swimming and wading through water, as well as remaining sure footed on watercraft.

Those unfamiliar with the **Shield** environment might use the word “boulder”, but what about when a rock is over 500m to a side? The shield is characterized first and foremost by granite and the landscape is dominated by the bedrock. This means whatever vegetation grows on tops has little purchase, and prefers the midland areas where dirt and debris has collected to form a thin suitable soil. The lower areas are covered in water, for it cannot drain through the rock, leaving innumerable irregularly shaped waterways which can often not be categorized easily as lakes or rivers. Crossing and recrossing these waterways is necessary, as is scampering over the occasional bare granite cliff. While the shield contains a suitable supply of food and an enormous amount of fresh water, its true bounty is in minerals, where all manner of gems and precious metals can be found in the innumerable granite outcroppings, and massive deposits lie just below the surface or underneath a lake.  
Those trained in the Shield can both climb and swim as natural movement.

### Inhospitable Environments

There are many places on the periphery of civilization that are too rugged for the common folk. They can be crossed with some danger, and small, specialized groups call them home permanently. When designing your world, you can separate areas using these inhospitable environments, then you can build links through them using more favorable terrain. For example, a chain of islands allow the coast to cut through an open ocean, a lush river valley spotted with swamps, grasslands and extensive farms creates a highway through a desert.

The cacophony of wildlife fills the world around the **Desert**, but nothing prepares visitors for the silence, the stillness, the death. Deserts can be filled with sand or rocks, or salt, or any other minerals. They can stretch for thousands of kilometers and offer nothing to those who would attempt to survive among them.  
Those trained to navigate deserts can see naturally in very bright light, and live, and take short rests in heat and cold. They can move naturally over shifting terrain and sand.

The steep cliffs and rugged sides of a **Mountain** break suddenly to reveal jagged peaks, barren slopes and glacier caps. Mountain landscapes can rise out of familiar terrain to reveal an alien world. They can jut out of a tropical jungle to plunge adventurers into snow and ice, or rise to such height that the air thins, the body weakens, and the organs simply fail. You can walk until your legs collapse beneath you, only to find you have crossed little more than a kilometer in a day, and yet a mountain range can stretch for hundreds of kilometers, cutting off otherwise close neighbors.  
Trained mountaineers have developed larger lungs that allow them to breathe naturally in air too thin for others. They can also move across snow, slopes and cliffs as natural movement.

The open **Ocean** is frequently seen as the most dangerous terrain that is naturally found in the world. It is a place wholly alien to humanity. What occurs beyound the misty blue line of the horizon, on a continent of water with towering waves, is beyond the imagination of most. Even there, rain is the only drinkable water, and the fish that are made into food can also present themselves as massive sharks. Whales evade dragons between the waves, so what hope does a land lover have of surviving here?  
Those trained for life on the open ocean can naturally swim. They are also able to rest in open water by floating on their backs, and can find sure footing on watercraft.

The **Jungle** is not like a forest. Where the huge trees modify the terrain and environment of a forest, the trees and plant life constitute a terrain in the jungle. You cannot move without stepping on the massive root structures of trees and pushing through thick vegetation. Frequently, the jungle floor does not see sunlight for years at a time as it is blotted out by the towering, thick canopy. Jungles frequently contain impassable vegitative structures, and the actual topography of travel through the jungle is dictated more by living and fallen trees and other plants than it is by the natural rise and fall of the land. Forests can modify the climate, but jungles can contain microclimates between their canopy and floor unlike what is experienced outside them.  
Those trained in jungle terrain are able to climb and pass over slippery terrain or that obstructed by vegetation as natural movement, and swim.

There are lands in the natural world that plunge below the freezing point of water periodically, but one of the most alien landscapes is the **Frozen** places of the world that only rarely rise to melting temperatures. When they are warmest, these places see snowfall, not rain, and when they are coldest, it’s too cold even to snow. Mammals who live here must seek refuge in huge fat supplies and shelter from the cold. Insects are rare, birds migrate away, and the land is left desolated. Starvation is unlikely only because the sheer cold is almost sure to kill you first. Even in the warm seasons, ice is found on glaciers, on the surface of the water, and a few inches below the ground.  
Those trained in Frozen encounters can take short rests while cold, see in extremely bright and dim light, and pass naturally over slippery terrain and snow.

### The Unseen Worlds

There are places that are not connected by direct geography, but through the ethereal veil that covers the world and permeates it with magical energies. When creating a world you should decide if the unseen worlds constitute whole planes of existence, geographically connected to themselves, or pockets where these strange places exist, or some combination. Also decide whether or not these locations can co-exist. Can an area that experiences a connection with the Feywild also be connected to the Deep? Can one travel from the Primordial realms to Abqaria without passing through the mortal world? Travel to the unseen worlds is also dictated by distinct circumstances, but powerful magic users can forge links to them outside these conditions.

The Land of Genius, the abode of the Muses, the City of Jinn, **Abqaria** is an expansive realm that rests on the state of aloofness and distraction one finds in deep thought, flow or inspiration. It is found when one loses their interest or grip on the mortal world, and so can often be discovered simply by an impassioned and driven seeking of it. Its entire sky is luminous in an even white light, blinding to behold and never dimming. Its inhabitants are elementals that can turn ethereal and fly at will, making doors and passages unnecessary. Though its wilderness is an endless and featureless desert with no food or water, it is spotted with oases of incredible luxury and marvelous works: Kasbahs. These are fortified cities of craftspeople, artists, magicians and inventors that are usually very progressive, and their aloof and fortified nature as well as powerful inhabitants allow them to stand against the covetous mortal factions that would tear them apart to feast on their riches.  
Someone trained in Abqari encounters can move over sand naturally, can rest in hot weather and see through bright light as well as see elementals who have made themselves ethereal.

Beyond the touch of sunlight lies the **Deep**. Whether it is a jungle floor enshrouded in perpetual darkness, a subterranean labyrinth, or the Midnight Zone of the open ocean, the Deep represents all that lies beyond the reach of natural light. There are tales of ancient and treacherous passages under mountains or even under seas, caves with no up or down, even subterranean worlds complete with jungles and intelligent life, and yet, to most, these remain cautionary tales against shunning the light of the sun, not directions to adventure. Transitions into the Deep are dark passages that seem to flicker or disappear in direct lighting.  
Those trained in the Deep can squeeze, climb and move across debris and slippery terrain naturally as well as see in dim light.

The Land of the Fae, Alfheimr, the **Feywild** is the homeland of the fey creature type. It is perpetually dark, with no sun, but a very large and luminous moon as well as frequent auroras that descend from the sky to ground level, thus illuminating it with dim light. The large trees that cover the Feywild use this dim light to grow extremely slowly, creating exotic and extremely dense woods. These forests are populated by fey creatures as well as frequent Terrestrial and Cthonite visitors. Parts of the Feywild are also associated with the afterlife of certain terrestrial humanoids, who rise in the Feywild after they die in the mortal realms. Passages to the Feywild must be dimly lit, usually by twilight or dawn, and they are often found at gates such as standing stones or cairns that physically manifest the passing from the mortal world to elsewhere. These passages can also be naturally occurring places that represent that change, such as the edge of a dark forest or swamp, or the boundary of a thick fog.  
Those trained in the Feywild can see in dim light and pass through vegetation and shallow water naturally. They can also see fey or undead who have attempted to make themselves invisible.

The land of one thousand islands is the sea or perhaps the inverted archipelago of seas that exists in the liminal space called **Manatuana**. Virtually every land near water speaks of a moving island, or an island that rises and falls at certain times of year, or the island to which the spirits of the dead are ushered. These islands all together constitute Manatuana, the plane of liminal islands. Usually these islands have ports between them, and they can be travelled as easily as any other island chain, however each island has only one tether to the mortal world, one condition under which people may travel to and from Manatuana. Perhaps the condition of one island is that it can only be found by the undead, and travelling back takes place on one specific day of the year. Perhaps its neighboring island appears in the eye of a hurricane every June. Perhaps another can be sought out any time of the year, but only found after one has permission from a certain primordial. Whatever the condition of the gate to the mortal realms, it is usually enough to dissuade most travelers and earn the skepticism of the rest.  
Those trained in Manatuana can naturally move on water vessels and can swim.

Some say the world was once roamed only by primoridals, and that they created **Primordial Realms** for one another that now constitute various other environments. But sometimes, in places widely understood as sacred, a path will open to reveal a realm untouched by all that has transpired since this ancient time. If this primordial land’s guardian is peaceful, such a bountiful garden can seem to be a sublime Eden, and sometimes humanoids contrive a fate such that they will rise undead in these beautiful places once they die. If, on the other hand, this realm’s sovereign is wrathful, a profound darkness seeps from this wound and contaminates the neighboring realms, and the primordial environment itself is a wasteland of polluted land, water and air, and its creatures are wretched abominations.  
Those trained to walk primordial realms are natural acrobats who can leap, swing, and climb as natural movement. They can also naturally recognize a primordial who has shapeshifted or otherwise taken a more mundane form.  
